Philip, welcome back to Talk Python.
Great to have you here.
Thank you.
Thank you for the invite.
Yeah.
We're going to talk about web things.
I love some web things.
We're going to talk about async.
I love async.
And we're going to talk about a lot of little cool things
you can plug into your web apps that make them more awesome.
And yeah, I think we give a lot of people
a lot of things to think about.
So yeah, let's do it.
So I guess quickly before we get into talking about Quart, maybe a little catch up on where it's been since the last time we spoke about that.
Give folks a bit of background on yourself for people who don't know you.
Sure, yeah.
I guess probably in this context and maybe the people listening are probably known for Quart and Hypercorn and helping maintain the pallets libraries like Flask and Werkzeug.
But, well, outside of that, I guess in my professional career, I work as a software engineer in London.
I work for a company called Cureleaf International.
And quite interestingly, because it's not very well known, we're one of the few companies that do medical cannabis in the UK.
Not many people know it's legal.
But, yeah, put that aside.
So I've worked there for about a year and a bit now.
Before that, I worked at various other software firms.
And then before that, I was actually a particle physicist working on an experiment out in Canada in a deep mine, which was quite good fun.
So you like your variety of your jobs, I can tell.
Yeah, I had a definite career shift.
Indeed.
Just funny, Cybar, you know, cannabis was legalized here three or four years ago in Oregon.
There are more cannabis shops than there are Starbucks, than there are McDonald's.
like oh well i could i could walk a floor from my house in five minutes it's nuts anyway uh it's it's
very different than it was a few years ago for sure um it's all fine but just different all right so
court um court like flask kind of but very interesting in that it's it's got some other
capabilities tell people about court how's it relate to flask what's the there's a lot of um
crossover you and david lord are working pretty closely it seems like on things yeah so i started
quarter about i guess seven maybe a bit more years ago now and the original idea was uh make flask
async at the time i couldn't figure out how to adapt flask at all in that direction so i thought
okay i'll start by just re-implementing the flask api using a sinker weight and that's what court
started out to be. And over the years, David and I have worked to try and merge the two together.
So the very latest change that's happened a few months ago is we actually based Quart on Flask
now. So there's a lot of shared code now. And for a long time, Quart was based on VirgSug. And if
you're familiar with the Palettes and Flask ecosystem, Flask is built on VirgSug and Quart
was, but now Quart is built on Flask, which is built on VirgSug. And they're very, very similar.
Yeah, that's fantastic.
Because the more that you can share,
the more you all can just focus on features.
Exactly.
Better rather than duplicating that effort.
And the other aim is that the APIs are the same as they can be
other than async await.
So you can take your Flask code base and move to court
just by adding async await.
That's the dream.
So yeah, even closer than it's ever been to that now.
You're pretty close to be able to rename the word Flask.
keeping the case sensitivity intact from flask to court and it works right yeah to in simple
projects yeah the more complicated ones it comes down to the extensions which we're going to talk
about yeah that's the whole topic of today right yes exactly but uh yeah that's the aim our long
term aim is to actually merge the two and be able to say async flask well it's kind of the case now
where you can say async flask is core.
And we can't quite do what Django's done
and put async Django as it is in Django.
Ours, you have to make a naming choice from the start.
But yeah, I think it's getting as close as we can get.
Maybe we'll figure out how to merge them in the future.
Yeah, it'd be great if you could choose to use async def
or just regular functions for your views in flask
and not really think about--
You can't do that now.
You've been able to do that for about two years,
I think, trying to figure out when we merge that.
So you could use either.
It's just not as performant.
If your code base is going to be mostly async,
you probably want to switch to core fully
because it'd be more performant and more reliable and robust.
Sure, why is that?
So the Flask implementation will run your async code
on a separate thread.
So you get all that overhead of switching between the threads,
sending the information over and back, et cetera.
Right.
Does it run like an asyncio event loop on the other thread?
but then basically curry the results back and forth yep and with court it's running right on
top of an ascii server yep straight right yeah okay yeah that's super cool and
you might be responsible for one of the more prominent ones out there tell people about uh
well what is an ascii server for people who don't know why does it exist and then you know the one
got yeah sure so uh historically there was the whiskey standard which separated servers from
from frameworks applications and kind of gave you a choice between how do you want to serve and deal
with concurrency and stuff and then how do you want your api to build your apps the framework to be
i think it was a great choice because it made the ecosystem really really nice for developers and
ascii is the same thing for async and so court is a is an example of an ascii framework and hypercon
They originally together, much like Sanic, started out as well.
But then I split out Hypercorn into its own thing.
And then later on, now Hypercorn is also a WSGI server.
So in some respects, Hypercorn is just a general purpose server for Python.
And so Hypercorn, it lives in the same general usage base as Gunicorn and MicroWSGI UWSGI.
right so i could run it in production in it kind of like a overseer mode where you can fan out
process worker processes and a system daemon system d all that is that that where it's at
yeah it's exactly like that yeah yeah and it also in the ascii space it's uh similar to uvcorn or
uh daphne that's it uh i think there's another but i've forgotten the name just now
Yeah, I was just messing with some Docker stuff and I was running the web app, a FastAPI app, NGunicorn using Uvicorn workers.
So handling the ASGI stuff that way.
Is it better to use Hypercorn rather than something along those lines?
A little more maybe?
Or what do you think?
I think it's a bit of a choice.
So how it differs from, well, Uvicorn in general is quicker because it's HTTP parser.
HP1 parser is quicker.
And there's a few other choices that tend to make it a bit quicker.
However, this last time I checked, Uvicorn doesn't support as many extensions as Hypercorn.
And it doesn't support HTTP2 or HTTP3.
Now, most people don't actually serve that directly.
They tend to have a load balancer in front.
But I tend to do that because it's quite exciting.
So you're getting there with Hypercorn.
And then after that, it's a bit of a choice between, you know, what features do they both have, what you want to use.
So they're fairly similar, I would say.
Sure.
Okay, somewhat.
Up to you, what do you want to choose?
But for people who have mental models maybe using uvicorn, they could check out Hypercorn, right?
Yeah, yeah.
So you wouldn't need GUnicorn because Hypercorn has the process model that GUnicorn adds to uvicorn.
And, yeah, you can just switch over.
It should be a one-liner because most of the time it's just that one command line where you set this up, right?
Yeah, very exciting.
I'm going to give it a solid look because I'm deep in that world right now playing with things,
which is very exciting, but not the topic for today.
So the topic for today is people who are interested in doing Flask and Quart, especially Quart.
What are ways you can do more, right?
So the frameworks are pretty simple.
Of all the different APIs out there, the Flask API has definitely won.
You know, even though there's many different web frameworks, right?
If you look at the way programming works, you look at FastAPI, you look at Litestar,
many of these things, it's like you've got to create a thing called app,
and then you say app.get, and so on, right?
So this style of programming is really popular.
I think it's because it's just straightforward and simple.
Opposite of Django, maybe.
Not so many batteries included,
but you can add the batteries through extensions, yeah?
Yeah, exactly.
I think that's always been the trade-off
between Django and Flask.
And, well, I would say perhaps even Django and Quart,
if you were to go Quart,
is Django makes the choice of your batteries
to a large extent,
whereas Quart and Flask means you have to choose, basically.
Yeah.
Which is really nice if you got,
like, you know, like, I would really rather use
this graph database for this thing.
And I would really rather, you know,
like you get a lot of choice,
but you have to,
you're going to have to build a little bit more yourself
and you've got to decide more yourself.
So, but with all these extensions,
it starts to become easier to click
the Lego blocks back together, yeah?
Yeah, exactly, yeah.
All right, so if you go,
if people listening go to court.palettesproject.com
and go there and find the extensions.
There's a great long list of extensions that we've got here
that they can choose to run, right?
And how to do that and so on.
But you picked out a couple that you really want to highlight
and we'll dive into them.
And if there's extra time,
maybe we can pick some more out of the list
and just see what we can make of them.
I think the best one to start with is the bit of discussion
around an extension called Quart Flask Patch,
which is a bit of an odd name,
and I maybe need to think of a better name for it.
But the idea behind this extension is it patches Quart at import time
to look very much like Flask,
so you can use some Flask extensions directly.
So this is, again, the idea to make it easier
if you are so willing to transfer from Flask to Quart,
this would allow you to an easier step
because you could add this one line import Quart Flask patch.
And some of your Flask extensions would just work.
Now you've changed to Quart.
- That's awesome because there's a bunch out there.
So what happens when I run this?
Does it basically say like, okay,
there's a bunch of module namespaces called Quart this,
Quart that.
let's create proxies called Flask that just delegate
into the court elements and expose that back.
So code written against flask dot whatever,
think it still exists.
- Yeah, exactly that, yeah.
It does slightly more because what it also needs to do is,
'cause a lot of the core APIs are async.
It needs to wrap them in a wrapper
that allows it to be called synchronously,
but it needs to do so in a nested sense.
And then I don't know whether you've looked much into like nesting event loops in one another or getting back to the same event loop.
It's a bit of a, I think it's fair maybe to call it a bit of a hack, but it does work well enough to allow you to buy that time to develop on.
But that's what it has to do.
Yeah, I really wish that Python had an ambient event loop.
That was the default.
This is like, get me an event loop.
Oh, it doesn't exist in exception.
Oh, create an event loop.
Sorry, exception.
It already exists.
Like, you know, there's like,
it's just really tricky to figure out
kind of deep down in some library.
Like, well, am I in charge of this?
Is it already going?
And I gotta be part of something bigger.
If you could just say, just async run this,
you know, and just you do that.
You need to make an event loop, make it.
If you don't need to make one,
just put it in the one that's already there, right?
Like, I really wish there was
a little bit cleaner story there,
but we're not going to solve that with court extensions.
No, no.
I mean, if they had have done that,
it would have made making Flask async a lot easier.
And you've probably come across the library.
I think it's Greenback.
Greenback? No, this is new.
So Greenback is a green stack switcher-based library
that allows you to get back to the event loop
when you're deep in some sync code,
which is quite nice in the sense that, you know,
it allows you to do all the stuff that's difficult.
But it's not so nice in that it's kind of hidden,
in a way, monkey patching type stuff going on in the background.
But I think this is what SQLAlchemy uses
to get their async await support in.
So it's certainly, I guess, popular.
Sure. Re-enter asyncio or trio event loops from synchronous code.
Very nice.
Cool.
Okay, so flask patch, that's pretty good if you just have some flask code and you're like, oh, I want to switch to court, but hopefully nothing changes and I'll just run this at the beginning and everything will work.
How often does that happen?
How often does it work out to be easy like that?
So it depends on what the extension does.
So if the extension does its own IO or calls certain Flask functions
that this extension can't patch, then, yeah, it just fails.
And, yeah, so not all of them.
If you go into tests, you can see an example of some of them
that we test against or I test against, sorry,
just to make sure they work.
Login, potentially.
Yeah, so login is probably the most popular, I think.
So I don't think it works for SQLAlchemy, for example.
There's a technical example anywhere that uses app context
as in a contact manager in a synchronous location.
Basically, that's too hard to patch, so they tend to all fail.
But yeah, a few do, and I hope it makes it easier for people.
I'm pretty sure it is used because I get bug reports,
so some people find it useful at least.
Yeah, absolutely.
It looks excellent, right?
So once you do all the magic,
you can just work with the login manager
and off it goes, right?
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
Super cool.
Okay.
Coors.
Everybody loves their cross-site origin scripting restrictions.
I guess we do love it in the sense that
we're not getting our bank account stolen
when we browse the web.
But as a web developer, you're like, oh, cores again.
I need to allow this thing to talk to that,
but it's, you know, right?
It can be a hassle.
And so I'm guessing cores allows you control those settings
and expose them and so on.
- Yeah, exactly that.
I think it's become more prevalent, right?
Since the switch to kind of front end frameworks
has been so popular, right?
Because you end up serving them, well, typically
you end up serving them separately.
But yeah, it's exactly as you described,
You can put decorators on roots,
or you can put it on a blueprint or on the entire app,
and you just say this is a cause policy for everything.
Yeah.
Very similar to Flask cause, but different API.
You can put it on even like a blueprint
and say this whole section of code is where the APIs live.
Things can call that, but nothing else.
That'd be really nice.
Yeah.
Okay.
Let me pull up some.
So it also has a slight website,
obviously court does web sockets where it's flask uh at least natively can't but yeah there's a
there's some web socket considerations for court as well which mostly come around to check in the
origin header but yeah it does that as well okay so you have a route and you just put the
at route underscore cores on it or like you said a blueprint or on the whole app or however you
want but and then what what kind of arguments does it take what can i ask it make it do yeah so i went
And for the kind of, I guess, functional kind of API for it.
So you can put in like the allow headers or the, what's the other one?
The credentials, I forget what it's called now.
But they're all listed and all keyword arguments effectively to it.
There was, in the issues, someone a couple of, maybe last year,
put out a new suggestion for a new API for cores libraries
that would be more intuitive but wouldn't match the actual headers that came out.
So at some point, I hope to look into that and offer that as well.
But at the moment, you basically say the header and then the values you want.
So you have to really kind of know calls to use it.
I see.
Okay.
It just basically juggles the headers and there's not a lot of abstractions in between.
No, no.
So I think in the readme, it shows you them all, actually.
So if you want to have a look there.
Get back.
Yeah.
If you go down a bit further.
Here we go.
Oh yeah, there you go.
- So these are all the headers you can control
and it's basically the same name, so.
- Sure, so access control allow origin,
access control allow credentials, expose headers, max age,
all this, all these things that you might,
you might wanna use, right?
Yeah, very cool.
Okay.
Oh, you have types as well.
So that's lovely.
Are you a fan of types, type hints?
- I am, yeah.
Since it came out, I've not, well, I've tried not to write untyped code.
I think, especially in a team, I think it makes a huge difference to the understanding of the code.
So, yeah, I'm a very big fan.
Yeah, I also think it makes your editors help you more.
You know, if it knows what type that is and you say dot, it'll, is this what you meant?
Like, yes, actually, I didn't know that existed, but that's what I want.
Give that to me.
without types you're kind of like well you know you could object or weird useless stuff that you
can't do anything with all right so cores if you need to do cores uh there's i guess
let me know how true this is but i think pretty much most of these that exist there's probably a
flask variant so if you use flask and you're like oh i need cores but i don't use court
just flask-cores instead of court-cores?
Yeah, yeah.
I think it's quite well-maintained, the flask one.
So yeah, the flask cores, it's a slightly different API,
but the concepts are all the same, obviously.
So yeah, not very much.
Okay.
All right.
Another one is auth.
Auth means so many different things.
Is it session-type based auth?
Is it OAuth?
Is it, who knows what, YubiKeys?
What are we talking here?
So this is, yeah, session management via a secure cookie.
So it's a similar usage if you're familiar with Flask Login,
but I didn't want to call it Court Login
because it didn't really do anything with the login.
It didn't check the password or the username or an MFA
or anything to do with login, in my opinion.
So I called it Orph instead.
But yeah, so with this extension,
you tell it to log in the user and give it some kind of identifier,
and it saves that information securely in a cookie for you.
And whenever the user comes back and presents the cookie,
it then pulls it out and turns it into what is called the current user.
So I think it's called the current user in Flask login as well.
So very similar to that.
Okay.
Does it actually give you a user object back or like an ID?
Yeah, you get a auth user object,
but you can change that to your own class.
There's a, I think there's an auth user class.
Oh.
oh the light's just gone excuse me a second it's absolutely dark in your room that's nuts
okay no worries hold on okay i might be a bit because the light that was on my face has just
died for some reason that's a real shame so sorry about that i wonder if i can find somewhere so
a bit lighter. I'll try something else.
It's a bit better, I suppose.
Yeah. At least we can see you.
Yeah.
Did the light bulb break or something?
It does seem to have just died. Yeah. I'm not really sure why.
It doesn't happen as much as it used to.
Right now we have LED and other stuff that lasts longer.
But if it's ever going to die, it would be now when I need it.
Yeah, of course it would.
- That's guaranteed.
- Of course it would.
All right, no worries, no worries.
All right, so you get this auth user back.
What is this auth user?
It's not like out of your database, right?
It's some...
- Yeah, yeah, so by default,
it's just as a method to say
whether the user is authenticated and to return their ID.
But if you customize it, if you extend it,
so what I typically do in my code base is I extend it
and I add methods to return the model from the database, for example.
Okay. Yeah, very cool.
Nice.
And there's a lot of fancy login off stuff,
but nice session cookie.
You know, it just works these days.
It still works really well.
It does, yeah.
Much simpler than JWTs and less likely to go wrong, I think.
Yeah.
I don't know.
It's not exactly related, but I've had a lot of websites now have given up on passwords,
but they don't use something new.
Or they just decided like every time you want to get to the site,
we're going to email you a code and you enter it.
It's like, when did that become the way we're going to log into everything?
It's driving me crazy.
So some good old username password.
We're going to store your ID in a cookie.
It warms the heart.
Bit off the topic, but I've been playing with the WebOrthing little USB keys and such recently.
I quite like it.
I think it might be a bit complex still.
It's a little tricky to get working.
But, yeah, I think that's probably the future, to be honest with you.
Yeah.
The site just sees, like, yeah, you got the right hardware thing.
Off we go.
Peter knows you're there.
Something like that, right?
Yeah.
Nice.
Okay.
So people need to deal with users.
this is not about storing them in the database,
encrypting, hashing their passwords,
or those types of algorithms.
It's really just about the web browser exchange
that involves setting a cookie when you're logged in
and getting it back and make sure
it's not tampered with, right?
- Yep, exactly that, yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
So what it does is it stores the value,
like here the number two is the ID for the user.
So it stores that in the cookie in plain text,
but then cryptographically signs it.
So you don't want to store anything sensitive in the cookie
if you're worried about it being read,
but you can store identifiers, et cetera,
and know that it hasn't been tampered with.
Yeah, that's the thing.
It's not going to harm you to know that your user ID is 2
or 75117 or whatever.
But if it's 2, it was to stop somebody from going,
let me change that to a 3 and see what happens.
Oh, look, I'm an admin.
How cool is that?
Right, that's the problem that you're trying to solve
with secure, right?
Exactly, yeah.
Yeah, cool.
Well, from my side, I baked that thing in myself,
but having an extension that just does it,
that sounds better.
Yeah, so the nice thing,
well, the bit I took a bit of interest,
I think it's changed now with Flask Login,
but a couple of the areas where I wanted to improve is
it does same site settings on the cookie by default.
So it'll start with the strict,
and then you can play around and go down to lax if you so need.
But it also has the special, it allows the special host,
you know, the double underscore host prefixes on the name
and stuff like that.
So although I don't think in reality that adds that much
to your security, but it's kind of a safety net in some respects.
Yeah.
Sometimes also it becomes a hassle when you're doing development because your
host is local host and you're saying it has to be on mysite.com.
You're like, well, I can't log in anymore.
So then you've got to have local hosts.
And then I don't know.
It doesn't feel super tamper resistant to me either.
Are you familiar with secure, secure pie?
I don't know if that's going to, there we go.
Yeah.
So this, that's a lot of.
- Archives.
- Oh, sadly.
Is there a new one?
No, but I think it still works.
I'm not sure what, it's been deprecated.
Yeah, mostly fresh.
Okay, well, I guess that's not being used as well,
or used that much,
but it used to be a way to kind of set
all those different things, I believe.
Or is this different?
- I think this is,
I thought you were gonna say secure headers, I think.
Was it called that?
- Yeah.
think oh i think it's just called secure that's what it is yeah that's the one so sorry that was
some other random thing that we found that was called secure pi but not this thing is still alive
right and supports court which is why i brought it up amongst like lots of other frameworks but
yeah you're going to tell people about this is cool yeah yeah so uh i mean you know i pretty
much end up adding all these by hand so yeah you you most of the head is you want to add and if you
do a pen test right they're gonna if you don't have these headers by default there again that's
going to be a finding straight away so yeah you just add all the ones you want really right for
one of the ones that you might not think of that you should probably have unless you have unless
you have a really specific use case is what if somebody created a site you know you had service.com
and they had service.io or you know whatever and they they bought that and then they could put
your whatever their URL is,
just into your site as a 100% width and height iframe.
Right?
And then they just capture all the keystrokes.
It's like, huh, you're typing into your thing.
It looks like your thing.
Your data is there.
You don't want people to do that to your site
or just randomly host your site in their site.
So for example, this secure thing will set X-frame options to same origin.
So you can't embed.
your site can no longer be embedded by default.
You've got to choose to let it be embedded.
All those kinds of things, right, are really nice here.
I actually got caught out by that many, many years ago.
I built an image photo editor in the browser,
and it started to get quite a lot of use.
I was like, oh, this is great.
And then I realized it was on somebody else's domain,
basically in an I-frame.
So, oh, well.
They're like, look at our amazing editor
that we're getting Google AdWord money for or whatever, right?
Yeah.
Exactly.
Yeah, so a little bit of header action will shut that stuff down.
But I mean, I didn't know to do it until I kind of dug into it more, right?
Yeah.
Or you find out your site somewhere else.
I think it's like a lot of it seems to be, you know,
learned with experience, I guess, isn't it?
Yeah, exactly.
That only happens once when you see your web app in somebody else's site
embedded as an iframe.
You're like, no, this is not going to be okay.
awesome all right so that was court auth as well as the secure thing
next i guess kind of related to security maybe not all right somewhat rate limiting yeah because
i mean on a login route you'd want to put a rate limiter on straight away to stop any kind
of brute forcing anyway right so oh absolutely and the ability to do really nice rate limiting
in ways that punish the rate limit breaker
is so much easier on async things like court, right?
Because if you don't want to be overwhelmed by them,
a lot of times you just say you send them
some kind of response code.
I don't know if the status code is like too many requests
or something like some four.
Yeah, four to nine.
There you go.
you can just send them back straight away,
but there's no cost for them to receive that 429.
You know, they're just like super quick going.
If you want to say like,
because maybe they're trying to guess passwords or something,
you're like, let's not let them guess so quickly.
So you can like sleep and then respond to them in 10 seconds later.
So it's like, oh, well, I don't know.
Is the password good or not?
Why don't you wait around for a while instead of going somewhere else?
With a asyncio based website,
That's await asyncio.sleep, nearly zero cost to you,
other than maybe an open socket, right?
And you can just like send them to sort of time black holes, super easy.
Whereas like a WSGI app, you're blocking a request
and you can only handle so many and all that kind of stuff, right?
Yeah, so this one sadly doesn't do any of that fun.
It doesn't have punishment built into it.
Tell us about how it works, what it does.
I was going to say, I think there was an article today suggesting you should serve zip-ons or something to unpleasant requesters.
But yeah, it doesn't do any of that.
Send them like 100 gigs back.
So this...
That would be good, actually.
Yeah, so this one implements rate limiting.
As it's defined, a user will be allowed to do so many requests in a certain time.
and also implements the RFC for the headers
that you're supposed to send back
when they go over the rate limit
so they know when the client can then request again.
I see.
Rather than just saying too many requests,
try again later,
and you'll be reset in five minutes
or there's a proper way to communicate that.
Yeah, yeah.
But the thing I find really interesting about this,
which I don't know if everyone does,
but I'll say anyway,
But most people implement rate limits in like a leaky bucket or something like that.
These are the standard algorithms.
And typically that requires you to store two variables per key, per rate limit you're looking at.
But there's a, I think it's not a very well-known algorithm called the generic cell rate algorithm.
I think that's right.
And this allows you to store one algorithm, one variable per rate limit.
And it's really quite nice, the algorithm.
very when you when you get it it's really intuitive and clean you basically what you store is when you
expect the next request to arrive and if the request arrives too early then you just rate limit it and
yeah it's really clever i think so i'd like more people to know about it basically because it's
a really nice solution it's a great solution yeah um so this it doesn't slow them down it just tells
them that they've gone over the limit in this particular one right yeah so if you expect it to
be in five seconds you don't just sleep for four and then let it in no no so the idea is that this
decorator is much less costly in terms of your compute than your function your handler so this
decorator will just send back a 429 very quickly and never touch your root instead sure okay
interesting i'm starting to think about maybe if you have a sink and a wait available and you your
algorithm told you when the next one was coming you could just sleep them until the next one's allowed
potentially if it wasn't you know 10 minutes right that was actually the client would i mean it
depends on your rate limits but there's a good chance the client would time out right so right
it'd have to be like five seconds or or something real short right like i don't want more than one
request a second type of rate limiting not like five per hour because then they would definitely
time out but yeah there's a lot of a lot of things you can do with this so basically the way it works
for people listening is you can set it up on the app so the entire app itself all the requests to
it are limited right or you can go and put kind of like tenacity you can put the decorator exactly
on a particular endpoint
and then set the details for that one, right?
Yep.
So a bit like Cores,
you can do it per app, per blueprint,
or per route, depending on what you need.
Okay.
And here you say rate limit one
and then a time delta.
What's the one?
It's the count.
So for a rate of one per second,
you might want to express that as 10 per 10 seconds.
So it would be instead of the one, the 10.
And that allows you a bit of bursting, if you will.
So, you know, that 10 can come in one second or it can be spread over.
So, yeah, it allows you to express the rate limits in different ways, really.
Guessing this probably bypasses the static files.
Is that true?
If you do the default limits, I think that applies to static files as well.
Yeah.
I can't remember now, but I think that's what it is.
Because you might have, you know, six CSS files, 20 images, and so on, right?
and one page request might blast those all back super quick.
- Yeah, you certainly want a higher limit.
- Yeah, but presumably you're using something
like Nginx or whatever, or maybe even a CDN.
And then all those other things I described
don't actually go through the Python app, ideally.
- Yeah, yeah.
I mean, it does work if you do it for the Python app as well.
So up to you, I think, yeah.
- Indeed.
All right.
WT forms. Next up, court WTF. What is this?
So this was, I'm tempted to say it's been a bit less popular recently with the front-end frameworks and stuff.
But when you did template rendering, you'd render the form,
then you do the validation in your Python framework for that form,
and you pass back the errors.
And basically, the WTF framework would do a lot of that for you,
So you could just put in, like in your template, an input box,
and it would do the errors and do the, like you can see here,
you could do the CSRF tokens and render all the HTML for the labels
and the actual input boxes and get it all hooked up very easily.
And that's what it does.
Yeah, it does all that.
And the validation, when it comes to the back end as well,
I think you can just do formed up, validate on submit or something like that.
Yeah.
Yeah, there we are.
And that's it.
That's your whole validation.
So it saves a lot of effort, really.
Yeah, that's pretty handy.
And I'm guessing you're getting generally generic HTML out on the client side
so you can CSS style it up all you like.
Yeah, I think it's, I can't remember.
I think WTF might have hooks so you can put styling directly in.
But yeah, it's pretty generic as I remember it.
Yeah, some frameworks require explicit stuff on, say, the input box.
like form-control would be bootstrap
and things like that, right?
There's probably some way to set a class.
Yeah, I think there's a class name argument.
I'm trying to, I may have misremembered that.
I think it was called class name.
Yeah, sure.
Nice.
Yeah, I haven't used this really,
but I've used it,
something kind of like it in other frameworks.
In the end, I ended up just going back
to writing my own HTML
because I felt like I was getting 60% help,
but maybe 30% struggle to fight the system.
You know what I mean?
And then I'm like, all right, you know what?
I just know this stuff well enough.
I'm just going to do it myself.
But if you don't want to mess with it,
you want some sort of quick development type of thing,
or maybe you're not super familiar with HTML,
this will definitely help, right?
Absolutely, yeah.
I think you can also write your own HTML instead
and just let it do the Python validation part.
As long as it lines up, yeah, sure.
Yeah, yeah.
I think it's just the name that matters.
Your input has to have the right name.
Because the CSRF...
I didn't know, right?
It couldn't know.
Yeah, exactly.
I was just going to say the CSRF part is quite easy and nice.
That just puts a hidden input in with the token in,
and it's all taken care of for you.
So that can be quite nice.
Yeah, excellent.
All right.
Schema.
So schema...
For APIs, right?
Yeah, so it's possibly the kind of more--
I'll say modern, but I'm not sure if that's the word I mean.
But yeah, so as an industry, we seem to have moved away
from the forms of old and form data
to send in JSON all the time, right?
And Quartz Schema is about saying,
I expect this structure to arrive.
Validate it for me.
So it's very similar to FastAPI, which I'm sure
a lot of people know.
Okay, that's pretty interesting.
So like you say, very much like FastAPI,
it kind of brings in some frameworks called model binding,
where you can say there's an argument and it's of this type,
and then like a class,
pedantic class or something along those lines,
and it'll, here's a data class,
and it'll take all the inputs, right?
Query strings or route parameters, whatever,
and parse them and map them in there,
and then just give you an object and go, here, it's ready.
Yeah, so for this library, it supports,
I've used all the documentation as data class,
but it's Pydantic-based at the moment.
And because of the, it's not actually the typing,
so there's no dependency injection or anything like that with FastAPI.
But it uses the decorator validate request,
and you pass it the model.
And if the request that arrives can be turned into that structure
and validated as such,
then your function will be called,
and that will be passed in as data.
If it can't, then the client will get a 400 response.
Bad requests, bad data.
Exactly, yeah.
Okay, so validate requests makes sense to me.
It means here's your structured object that comes in,
passed in as data.
What's validate response?
So it's the same concept, but going back.
So if you return a to-do class instance itself,
there's no validation to do, right?
You've already said it's the right structure.
But often you'd return a dictionary
or something like that, right?
And expect it to go back as JSON.
What this will do is it will say,
I'll check that dictionary is of the right structure.
And if it isn't, it throws a 500 response to the client
and an error that you can go and view
in whatever error monitoring tool you've got.
Sure. Okay. That's excellent.
So I see you have data classes here
and you said it also works with Pydantic.
Yeah, so, well, actually, a shout out to one of your previous recent streams is I'm working on msgspec support at the moment because I actually quite like that.
Message spec is interesting.
So it will support Pydantic and msgspec.
So you'll be able to use Pydantic, DataClasses, Atters, msgspec stuff, or the msgspec struct.
I think that's probably all of it.
But, yeah, quite a bit of choice there.
- Struct classes really,
they've done some super interesting things here
to make these data classes almost better for performance
than even regular, and for memory and stuff,
than regular Python classes.
It's quite impressive.
- Yes, absolutely.
- Yeah, for people who don't know,
maybe just tell them real quick what msgspec is.
They probably know data classes in Pydantic.
- Yeah, so much like data classes,
and you can see here, it's a nice,
simple way of creating a class with various things created for you.
But it also, much like Pydantic, will do validation when you try and,
if you use one of its functions to convert raw data, like a dictionary, into this type.
And much like Pydantic as well, it also gives the ability to take this model
and turn it into an open API, a JSON schema definition.
And that's the final thing Quartz schema does is once you've decorated all your roots,
it will auto-generate an open API definition for you as well.
It will.
Okay.
Yeah, using Swagger slash docs.
I think that's really nice.
A lot of APIs just don't.
They're like, we're not going to do that.
If they don't have something automated to do it.
And having typed classes representing all your inbound and outbound data,
pretty easy, right?
Yeah, I mean, it really helps with mypy, right?
Because instead of having your request.data or something like that,
which is some dict that, as far as mypy concerns, can be anything,
it must be a to-do instance in this function now.
So yeah, it really helps with your type checking.
Yeah, absolutely.
All right, what do we got next?
Sock from Miguel Grimberg, Flask WebSocket.
Yeah, so this one there is an extension for,
because this is one of the areas that Quart being natively async
can just do itself.
So Quart, I think I describe sometimes as a superset of Flask
because it can do everything Flask can do and a bit more.
The C++ of Flask.
Yeah, exactly.
Awesome.
So WebSockets kind of solve a problem
that websites generally have not been able to do.
Like once you make a request,
usually there's the response and that's it.
But what if the server, you want to send more stuff to the server, server wants to send stuff out to you later, like I started this job three seconds later, now it's done or, you know, this bidirectional exchange.
It's really cool, but a lot of times I feel like it's a little over the top, right?
Like a lot of times I think people maybe just want push notifications from the server and not true, like let's have a conversation.
I just need to know when this happens, just let me know as soon as it's done, right?
Yeah. Go ahead.
I was going to say,
server-sent events seem to be not that well-known,
but probably describe your usage really well.
That's exactly what I was getting at.
Does court support SSE?
Does it support server-sent events?
Yeah. I think there's an extension for it,
but in reality, it's a very small bit of code you need.
I mean, because you literally return a response with a certain header, and then you just return a, well, here we go.
There's an example in the documentation for court.
But you just return a certain data structure, and then you've got it.
Yeah.
So I think that's, when people say they want WebSockets, I think most of the time this is what they want.
They want the client, the server to call the client sometimes, not just the other way around.
Yeah.
So I'm going to go slightly off topic because it's going to interest me.
Well, it's related to this, but one of the things I implemented in Hypercorn, because I find it really interesting, is I think two, no, it must be more like four years ago, they introduced WebSockets for HTTP2.
And of course, one of the reasons you want WebSockets is because the cost of opening a connection for HTTP1 is fairly expensive.
So you can keep it open and do the bidirectional.
But with HTTP2, you don't even need an extra connection anymore.
You can have your WebSocket stream on the same connection as all your requests as well.
So it's really nice and efficient.
So, yeah, I'd love to have an opportunity to make more use of it because I find it really interesting.
But the code I write professionally at the moment doesn't quite need that level of real-time interaction.
I know.
All the stuff I built, I'm like, that would be so fun.
But, you know, I just don't need that.
Yeah, exactly.
Just have no use case.
There are apps, I'm sure, that do it, right?
Like really complicated single-page apps like StreamYard that we're using right now, for example.
This has probably got some crazy interchange going on, but I don't write this kind of apps either.
All right.
Let's see.
So the socket stuff, which is cool.
That's, like you said, built into court.
That's one of the advantages of it.
But, you know, you can use Miguel Grimberg's stuff to add it to Flask.
SQLAlchemy.
You mentioned them before.
Probably outside.
If you're not in the Django space, it's not the only option for sure, but it's probably the de facto choice people think, I want an ORM for a relational database.
You'd probably start here, right?
Yeah, I think you would.
Yeah.
And this is a port, as I understand it, of the Flask SQLAlchemy extension to work with or natively work with Quart.
So it should match all your expectations, I think.
And if you're used to it, you just use this and it works with Quart, and there you go.
Let's see an example here.
So you can set up your database with a pretty interesting nested type of construct here,
like just passing rich arguments that take more.
And if you look at the code on there, just the shape of the code is kind of unique here.
But you end up with this constructed database thing, and then it has the base model class, and off you go, right?
You just create a session from it, do all the things.
I've always had mixed feelings about these things that you set up here that are built into the web frameworks, potentially, that make them part of the request.
Because if you're going to go and write little scripts that also do data stuff,
you want to be able to get access to the data and the models over there as well.
All this looks like it does take the app there,
but I don't know if it really needs a meaningful app.
I don't think that I would use it, probably.
No, I don't think you need to be within an app context to use the DB.
I may be wrong there, but yeah, I think you could probably use it in a script.
Sure.
Yeah, that's the only thing that concerns me
about these like database helpers is like,
you know, I need to do database stuff
outside of a request as well.
Even potentially some of the stuff
that we're going to talk about in a minute,
like it's just a background task
that's not part of an actual request,
but it could even still be
in the web server process, right?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I mean, I use,
there's an extension called QuartDB,
which is my preference
because I prefer to write the SQL
and go down the OIM route.
And yeah, that works as you'd expect.
You still set it up and pass it the app,
which I think is true of this,
but then you can just use it without an app context.
It just basically uses the app to get the configuration values,
so it knows where the database is.
Got it. Okay. Interesting.
And now we're on to probably the biggest one that you want to talk about,
which is quite exciting, court tasks.
Yeah, so this is a very recent release that I haven't announced anywhere else yet.
But this is something, I think I read a post recently that said, for your web framework, you need like five things.
Like you need a database connection, you need some kind of validation, input, output, rate limiting, authentication, and you need array to run periodic tasks.
And in the past, my way to do this was extra infrastructure.
So it was Cron running somewhere or some kind of, I think,
CloudWatch to some kind of event generator based on a Cron schedule.
And for me, that's just annoying because now I have to build extra infrastructure,
which I don't need.
Maybe not Celery or RabbitMQ or something like that, right?
Yeah, exactly.
But again, with those, you need that extra infrastructure for it to work.
It's another server.
It's another thing that could get hacked.
You've got to patch it.
You've got to secure it.
You've got to know how to run it.
It could go down and then none of your background stuff works anymore.
it's all a hassle, even though it has a benefit.
Yeah, yeah.
So what I really want to do is make use of the async event loop
and just run a task in the background periodically.
And obviously, at some point, this will normally scale
because I have so many background tasks that dominate the server
and stop it doing requests.
But while I'm small and starting out,
this just makes life so much easier.
Absolutely.
It totally does.
And because everything's async and await,
you can just set up the task and just await the task.
And it just blends in hopefully well with all the web requests, right?
Yeah, yeah.
So for court tasks, if you write your task as an async def,
then it will run it in the event loop.
But if you write it as a def, it will run it on a thread.
So if you have synchronous code that's going to block the event loop,
like you're using traditional IO for one of the better phrase,
then if you just use def, it will run it on a task.
won't block your event loop and you'll be fine.
So yes, it's nice in that respect.
Yeah.
And as long as your async pieces are fine grained enough,
you probably won't know.
Right.
Yeah.
It's just,
if you run a whole bunch of synchronous code or something like that,
you might start to clog things up,
but don't do that.
Honestly,
like what you find,
what I find anyway on the web most of the time is you're talking to other things, talking to a
database, talking to a cache, talking to an API. All those things are like perfectly suited for
await because it's most of the time you're almost outside the web app. Yeah, I think the perfect one
for this that I keep thinking of is when you want to send a periodic email, like a reminder or a
summary of the day, just write this decorated task run and you have your function that just sends
emails it's yeah that's why it exists for me it makes that so much easier yeah absolutely
right yeah like you say just send out a quick email like hey i need to reset my password all right here
we're going to send you you know call an api like SendGrid or something like that we're going to
send you but you don't want to block block things up you just kick that onto the background work and
off it goes so one of the things that people would say all right you guys i know you're excited about
but we need durability what about what if the server goes down or what if another potential
issue is what if you scale like at least the cron stuff like what if you fan out your web app into
like 10 worker processes and you say run in five seconds and they all run in five seconds
10 times or those kind of issues here.
So this extension supports a couple of extensions to it.
So you can pass it a custom store,
which allows you to store when the task last ran.
And so that means if the server goes down
and it misses an invocation,
then when it comes back up,
it will recognize that and run the task straight away
rather than wait till the next time.
And the other thing it supports is you can decide what should happen before the task starts and what should happen after.
So this allows you to put some locking in for your second case.
In both cases, the reason it's not built in to court tasks is you'll need to decide where you store this information, where you store the lock, where do you store the...
So usually a database works for that.
So yeah, you can add it all, but you've got to choose how yourself.
That's cool that it has placeholders and ways to plug that in.
That's what I was thinking of.
Instead of just storing it in memory and throwing it on the queue,
put it into the database and have the task just check the database and go,
okay, I'm working on this one.
No one else do this.
We don't want to send 10 emails to the person.
Oh, yeah.
So it's not a job queue, although I've been thinking about that recently.
So, yeah, it can't be like it doesn't work in the sense that a job will run once.
It will do jobs periodically.
Got it. Okay. So more of a scheduler type of thing.
Yeah.
So I need to see if anyone's uploaded files to this location
and then convert it from PNG to WebP or like SafeSpace.
Or you could be like,
every morning I want to send out an email to the users and say,
imagine it's a to-do app because everyone uses that as an example,
and say, these are your tasks for the day or something like that.
Sure.
People who've signed up for the daily digest,
send them their digest, right?
Yeah.
Yeah, very cool.
And because it's on a background thread,
it's not going to harm anything.
Excellent.
Okay, well, it looks pretty simple.
Again, very decorator-driven, right?
Yeah, so, I mean, with all of these,
the extensions at least I've written,
I've tried to follow the kind of Flask conventions
for better, for worse.
So, yeah.
It definitely feels amazing.
yeah it feels like if you're already doing flask or court you just know what to do it's just similar
yeah yeah excellent all right well i think we've covered all the ones we explicitly said
let's make sure we get a chance to cover those i definitely want to encourage people to check out
the court extensions page because there's quite a few more i'll see if maybe some jump out at me
here that are kind of cool.
I was going to say we briefly mentioned QuartDB,
which is one I maintain,
so I can say a bit more about that if you're interested.
Yeah, sure. It's hanging out right here on your list.
This is much like the SQLAlchemy one.
It's a way to connect to a database,
but unlike the SQLAlchemy way,
it doesn't promote an ORM.
Rather, it just gives you connection that you can run
I don't know you can do that with SQLAlchemy.
I mean, typically that's not what people do.
So in this case, like the example here is you pass it
the URL you want to connect to, and it supports Postgres
and SQL lite at the moment.
And then in the roots, you have this g.connection object
that you can make use of.
And you can make use of that in background tasks.
And it's quite easy to make use of it actually in QuartTasks
as well.
It's just a little snippet you need to do.
But yeah, and that's it.
get a connection that you can do whatever you want with.
Yeah. Okay.
Very nice way to just have everything set up, right?
Like you don't have to worry about passing these things around and create a
transaction, go do your things, right?
Excellent.
What else jumps out here?
We got court events for broadcasting and server sent events and web sockets.
There is one. Yeah.
Yeah. Another one that's cool is minify,
like minifying all of your elements, CSS, JavaScript.
Yeah. I've been doing that at the build stage a lot recently.
There's a little snippet I can share if people want for
quote where you change the static function so it will
serve a GZIP version of the static file
over the un-GZIP one if the client will accept it.
Then if you do it at build time,
Because I think this one might be a mistake,
but I suspect it works at runtime,
so it compresses at runtime.
It sounds like it does, yeah.
Hmm.
Let's see.
He talks about doing it as a response, right?
So, yeah.
Oh, it does have a cache, though.
Ah, okay.
Yeah, we can get similar.
Yeah, very similar to what I'm suggesting then.
Excellent. Those are really, really handy.
if people go and they want to make their website better check out um gosh
i guess page speed light house is what i was going to call it yeah but they renamed it to page speed
so you go put in
see and talk python and see how we're doing but it'll give you things like how is your
site fast enough. Let's see how the desktop one's doing, right? And it'll give you a score. And,
you know, are we going to index you well, or are you going to be punished for having
some kind of crappy experience? And this minification stuff that we're talking about
can help there, right? Absolutely. Yeah. Similar to your DB, your QuartDB, we have QuartMotor,
which is the async database access library for MongoDB. So I suspect it's super similar.
I haven't used it because I use Beanie, which is like ORM style.
So kind of on top of those things.
KeyCloak is interesting.
Redis also is pretty interesting.
Uploads.
Let's finish it out with uploads and we'll call it after that.
So I haven't used this, but uploading files can always be a bit of a hassle, right?
But yeah.
So it looks very similar to the Flask uploads one.
So it's kind of a nice wrapper around how you get access to the files you've uploaded and what you do with them kind of thing.
Yeah, that can be a little bit of a hassle, right?
So you've got your request.files and all that.
Okay, cool.
I don't know how to use this thing, but I know that people kind of struggle uploading files a lot.
So yeah, I don't,
I don't tend to actually write it that much come to think of it, but yeah,
it's it's just makes it easier.
Yeah, exactly. You know, profile profile pictures,
maybe it's like that kind of stuff I'd be doing, but yeah.
Anyway,
I guess I've wrote some code that lets you upload MP3s at one point for
podcasts, but I stopped using it.
So it's not top of mind anymore.
Anyway, excellent, excellent stuff here.
I love just going through and seeing all these little pieces,
these little building blocks you can bring together
and just quickly build an app.
So thanks for being on the show and telling everyone about it.
Oh, thank you.
Thank you.
Yeah, great.
Hopefully opportunity to introduce some stuff
that I hope people find useful.
Yeah, and just more broadly,
like thanks for working on court and pushing that forward.
Yeah, I mean, like I said, our aim is hopefully we'll, well, we're kind of going around in different ways of how we actually might merge Flask and Quart.
But yeah, that's still the ultimate aim.
I kind of think because of the limitations we were talking about earlier about running async code when you're deep in async code base, I think you'll always have to make a choice with Flask where if you're going to be mostly sync, you go Flask.
If you're mostly async, you go an async flask or whatever it's called, which at the moment
is called quart.
But we might be able to put them in the same code base perhaps.
So then you can maybe mix and match because you can certainly run flask and quart together
with Hypercorn as the server and just have what's called the dispatch middleware layer
in between that says for these routes, it goes to flask and for those routes, it goes
to quart.
So yeah, there are lots of ways to do it, but it depends what you want to do really.
Yeah, that's interesting. Maybe you could even create a different app.
Instead of app equals flask, it's app equals async flask. Who knows?
Yeah, I mean, that's effectively what Quart is.
I mean, I could have called it async flask at the start.
A flask, yeah. It ranks higher in the alphabetical sortings.
Yeah.
All right, so people are excited with Quart.
Maybe it's back on their radar now that we've been talking about all these extensions.
What do you tell them? How do they get started? What do they do?
Oh, I mean, you can just pip install Quart.
And the quick start is as simple and familiar as it's ever been for Flask.
You just do app equals Quart, and then app.get or app.whatever,
and then your function below to handle it.
Awesome. Yeah, the selling point is basically,
if you know Flask, you know Quart, you just use the word async some of the time.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Even the WebSocket support, I've tried to make it as familiar as you would be
as it would be if you had new Flask.
So instead of using the global request,
you now use the global WebSocket.
So there's WebSocket.headers
and you can do WebSocket.send,
send a message, that kind of stuff.
So hopefully it just feels familiar.
Yeah, fantastic.
I'm sure it does.
And thanks for being on the show
and nice to have you back.
Thank you.
Catch you next time.
Yeah, you bet.